.. _mem_part_pol:

Intermagnet Participation Policy
================================

.. include:: ../../shared/variables.rst
.. include:: ../../shared/targets.rst


INTERMAGNET is a global near real-time network of absolute
geomagnetic observatories with a common data quality standard
and common data publication platforms. Observatories wishing to
become a member of the INTERMAGNET one-minute data network are
required to submit an application to the IMO Applications and
Standards Subcommittee chair that demonstrates that the
INTERMAGNET requirements on data quality and data delivery are
currently being and will continue to be met. Applications are
assessed by the INTERMAGNET Operations Committee against a set
of documented standards and the Committee will recommend that
the chair of the INTERMAGNET Executive Council accepts the
application if:

-  The institute abide by the INTERMAGNET Principles and
   Conditions (:numref:`inter_princ`).
-  The observatory is meeting and will continue to meet the
   documented standards on data quality and data formats.
-  The observatory transmits and will continue to transmit data
   in near real-time to the INTERMAGNET network.
-  If using satellite communication, the institute must keep
   its DCPs operating within allotted transmission time
   'windows'. Upon receipt of notification from a Geomagnetic
   Information Node (GIN) that a DCP is transmitting outside of
   its allotted time window, the responsible Institute agrees
   to stop the transmission or correct the timing of
   transmission within 24 hours.
-  The observatory will submit definitive data and accompanying
   files for publication in the INTERMAGNET data set every year.
-  The institute must communicate any instrument or practice
   change to the IMO Applications and Standards Subcommittee
   chairman.

The INTERMAGNET Operations Committee will continually assess
the near real-time data delivery and submitted annual
definitive data from participating observatories against the
definition of near real-time and data quality standards for
one-minute definitive data in the INTERMAGNET Technical Manual.

It is recognised that any near real-time network is potentially
subject to temporary operational issues leading to a
degradation of data quality or loss of data. If required, the
INTERMAGNET Operations Committee may be able to offer advice or
technical support to resolve such problems. However, an
observatory that is not able in the long-term to meet the data
delivery and/or data quality specifications defined in the
Technical Manual may ultimately have INTERMAGNET status
withdrawn.

For operational purposes, INTERMAGNET may occasionally need to
modify data formats or the method of data delivery but these
changes will not be applied retrospectively.

.. _mem_part_pol_obs_apl:

Observatory Application To The Intermagnet Network
--------------------------------------------------

Observatories intending to join the INTERMAGNET network are
requested to submit an application and sample data to the IMO
Applications and Standards Subcommittee chair using the
`application form`_ on the INTERMAGNET web site. The application will then be
reviewed by the INTERMAGNET Operations Committee against the standards
defined in the Technical Manual. If these standards are met,
and once near real-time data are being transmitted to the
network, the INTERMAGNET Executive Council chair will
communicate to the observatory that the application was
successful and that the observatory is now able to participate
as an INTERMAGNET observatory. Observatories are accepted into
INTERMAGNET on the condition that the data quality and data
delivery standards will continue to be met.

Applications may be rejected on the grounds that the data
quality or data delivery standards are not judged to have been
met, in which case the Operations Committee will communicate
this and the reason for the decision to the observatory making
the application. There is no restriction on re-application.

.. _mem_part_pol_on_par:

Ongoing Participation In The Intermagnet Network
------------------------------------------------

On a regular basis, the Operations Committee will monitor the
delivery of one-minute, near real-time data of all
participating observatories against the requirements outlined
in the Technical Manual.

Where an observatory does not transmit near real-time,
one-minute data to the INTERMAGNET network for a continuous
period of one-year, this will be considered to be a breach of
the INTERMAGNET data delivery requirements and the observatory
will be notified of the breach by the Operations Committee.

The Operations Committee will also assess definitive data
submitted for inclusion on the annual DVD against the data
quality standards for one-minute data as defined in the
Technical Manual. The deadline for submission of definitive
data will be communicated by the Operations Committee in
advance and sufficient time will be provided for final
processing following the year end. In the case where data not
judged to meet the data quality standards or where the data
formats do not comply with those defined in the Technical
Manual, the Operations Committee will establish a communication
with the observatory to resolve the issue.

Where no definitive data have been submitted prior to the
submission deadline, this will be considered to be a *breach*
of the INTERMAGNET data delivery requirements and the
observatory will be notified of the breach by the Operations
Committee.

Where definitive data have been submitted, but where data
quality or format issues have not been resolved prior to the
INTERMAGNET data publication date, definitive data will not be
published under the assigned INTERMAGNET DOI, this will be
considered to be a *breach* of the INTERMAGNET data quality
requirements and the observatory will be notified of the breach
by the Operations Committee.


.. _mem_part_pol_with_drawal:

Withdrawal Of Intermagnet Status
--------------------------------

Under certain circumstances and on the recommendation of the
INTERMAGNET Operations Committee, the INTERMAGNET Executive
Council chair may withdraw INTERMAGNET status from a
participating observatory. An Operations Committee
recommendation of withdrawal will be made if a participating
observatory:

-  Does not respond to a communication from the Operations
   Committee notifying that the observatory has breached
   INTERMAGNET standards or
-  Does not transmit near real-time, one-minute data to the
   INTERMAGNET network for two consecutive years or
-  Does not submit or does not have definitive one-minute data
   accepted for publication for two consecutive years.

Where an observatory has had INTERMAGNET status withdrawn, the
observatory will be required to submit a further application to
the INTERMAGNET Observatories Subcommittee chair before
INTERMAGNET status can be reinstated.



