.. _inter_hist_status:

History And Status Of INTERMAGNET
=================================

Th possibility of worldwide data communication between
magnetic observatories was first raised seriously at the
Workshop on Magnetic Observatory Instruments, held in Ottawa,
Canada, in August 1986. Further discussions, particularly
between the British Geological Survey (BGS) and the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) took place in May 1987 at the Nordic
Comparison Meeting held at Chambon la ForÃªt, France. A pilot
scheme between BGS and USGS was described at the sessions of
Division V of IAGA during the XIXth General Assembly of IUGG in
Vancouver, Canada, in August 1987, with the proposal that the
geomagnetic community should adopt automatic observatories with
satellite communications as its mode of operation for the
future. INTERMAGNET embodies the proposal to extend worldwide
the network of observatories communicating in this way. A
successful pilot scheme operated during 1989, with the UK, USA,
and Canada transmitting and receiving at 12 minute or 1 hour
intervals geomagnetic data recorded every minute. As a result
of the pilot scheme, the IAGA Executive Committee endorsed
INTERMAGNET. The Study of the Earth's Deep Interior (SEDI)
Steering Committee has also endorsed INTERMAGNET.

At present the observatories shown in Appendix B are
transmitting daily over the Internet, or through satellites to
Geomagnetic Information Node (GINs). More stations are coming
online rapidly. GINs are now operating in Edinburgh (BGS),
Golden (USGS), Kyoto (Kyoto U.), Ottawa (GSC), and Paris
(IPGP).
