.. _inter_intro:

Introduction
============
.. include:: ../../shared/variables.rst


The Genesis of INTERMAGNET resulted from a convergence of
scientific need and emerging technology. The growing interest
and importance of space weather fostered a need for "near
real-time" magnetic data, and the semi-automation of some of
the world's major networks in the late 1980s made it possible
to provide data in a timely fashion. However, no standards or
guidelines existed to ensure that, as other observatories
converted from analogue to digital recording, their data would
be of comparable quality to data from existing automated
observatories; nor was there any guarantee that their data
would be compatible with data from existing digital systems.
INTERMAGNET was founded both to develop standards for the
acquisition and transmission of observatory data and to
encourage the establishment of digital magnetic observatories
in all parts of the world. Although the near real-time
transmission of data is a major focus of INTERMAGNET activity,
much effort is also spent ensuring that INTERMAGNET
observatories provide data of sufficient accuracy to meet the
needs of scientists who study the magnetic field of internal origin.

By any measure INTERMAGNET has been a resounding success. In
three decades it has grown from a pilot project to an
internationally recognized organization that includes
approximately 50 institutes and over 100 observatories. In
2017, more than 9 million observatory-days of data are
distributed to users. These are used in a variety of ways:
magnetic reference field model production; space weather
forecasts; directional drilling; magnetic surveying; and
scientific research.
However, user needs change, and to maintain its relevance
INTERMAGNET must evolve accordingly. To ensure the continued
success of the organization, INTERMAGNET liaises with users to
make certain that the observatories provide data that meet the
needs of all its users, now and into the future.
