.. _inter_vis:

Intermagnet Vision, Mission and Objectives
==========================================

The main objective of INTERMAGNET is to establish a global
network of cooperating digital magnetic observatories, adopting
modern standard specifications for measuring and recording
equipment, in order to facilitate data exchange and the
production of geomagnetic products in a timely manner.

In more detail, INTERMAGNET has a specific vision, mission and
strategy, which are as follows.

**The INTERMAGNET vision is of**

A global, real-time, permanent geomagnetic observatory network,
which is recognized as a key Earth observation system that
provides data, which serve scientific research into the Earth,
from its deep interior to space, and support operational
services benefiting society.

**The INTERMAGNET mission is to**

Establish and maintain an organization with a worldwide
membership drawn from institutes operating geomagnetic
observatories that is dedicated to building a network of
geomagnetic observatories supplying consistent data, with the
geographical coverage, quality, and timeliness of delivery
required to meet the evolving needs of research and applied
science.

**The INTERMAGNET strategy is to**

#. Set mandatory standards for measurement, data processing,
   formats and transmission for network membership,
   and to support geomagnetic observatory operators in achieving these standards by providing technical assistance.

#. Provide advice on the establishment of new observatories, to
   help co-ordinate initiatives taken by member institutes and
   to optimize the scientific value of the global network.

#. Support data services, as a member of the World Data System,
   by maintaining an infrastructure for geomagnetic observatory
   data collection and dissemination.

#. Communicate with data users to promote the use of
   INTERMAGNET data and to understand their requirements,
   feeding this information into the definitions of operating
   standards.

#. Work closely with the International Association of
   Geomagnetism and Aeronomy and other organizations concerned
   with magnetic observatory operations.

#. Maintain a dialog with technology providers to take
   advantage of new developments in instrumentation and data
   acquisition, and to advise them of user demands for data in
   order to inform their system developments.

This manual therefore describes the global near real-time
magnetic observatory network, known as INTERMAGNET. Throughout
the document, the term "magnetic observatory" will mean a
recording station where absolute measurements of the
geomagnetic field are made on a regular basis over many years
and which produces data of the requisite quality for secular
variation studies.
