.. _inter_part:

Participation
=============

.. include:: ../../shared/variables.rst

INTERMAGNET membership is available to institutions who wish to
operate one or more INTERMAGNET Magnetic Observatories (IMOs).
Members agree to allow distribution of their IMO data in
accordance with INTERMAGNET guidelines. In return for
participation, Institutional membership provides: access to
near real-time data from any IMOs for all members of the
Institution; access to the best in magnetic observatory
technologies and assistance in implementing them. There are, at
present, no membership fees. An application to become a member
is submitted to the INTERMAGNET office for approval by the
Executive Council, subject to technical evaluation by the
Operations Committee. Information on how to apply for
membership can be found in chapter 8.

Products
========

Values of geomagnetic components along with other INTERMAGNET
products may be retrieved from the website
(|intermagnet_website|)
under Data. Values are kept on-line permanently to allow
comparisons between preliminary and definitive data and to give
data sets that can be used to test software that works with
preliminary data. When available, definitive data should
preferably be used. Before 2017, a physical media containing
definitive data from INTERMAGNET observatories was created
annually. After 2016, definitive data will not be published on
a physical media and will be available for download on the
INTERMAGNET website. The INTERMAGNET physical medias are
available at no charge to participating institutes and to bona
fide scientists for academic purposes only. Technical help for
operators of IMOs may also be available by special arrangements
through the INTERMAGNET office.