.. _abs_mes_ddqc:

Data Quality Control
====================

Many factors are involved in achieving good baseline control at
a magnetic observatory. Some suggestions are presented in the
following sections.

A good adopted baseline shows a low scatter of individual
baseline determinations, and has small drifts and few offsets.
However this is dependent on the stability of the variometer
installation, how well its parameters (scale-values,
orientation, temperature coefficients, etc.) are known, and
other factors as well as the quality of the absolute
observations. It should also be remembered that a large
long-term variation in a baseline does not mean that the
baseline observations were poorly made. The change could be
real, the result of seasonal temperature changes or possibly
pier tilt, for example. Scatter on a shorter time scale could
be an indication of poor observations, but it could also
indicate problems with the magnetic environment, poor
temperature control, or problems with the magnetometer.

If possible, calibrate the variometer parameters in a
controlled environment before installation, if this has not
already been done by the manufacturer.

INTERMAGNET recommends to put effort into determining the
adopted baselines, e.g. by the use of curve-fitting algorithms
to fit time-dependent adopted baselines to the series of
absolute observations. A statistical estimation of the
quality-of-fit of the adopted baselines should be made. The
adoption of the baseline should also take into account known
sudden disruptive events, and estimations of the uncertainty of
absolute observations (partly derived from the individual
observations and corresponding variometer values, and perhaps
partly derived from other factors such as an estimate of the
experience of the observer).

