INTERMAGNET CD-ROM SOFTWARE
===========================

The INTERMAGNET CD-ROM software is a menu-driven program that
allows the user to display data in both graphics and text
modes. It also allows the user to Save the graphics in the form
of \*.PCX files that can then be imported into other programs
that accept the PCX format; and also Save the text in the form
of ASCII files to the hard drive or floppy disk. Output may
also be sent to an Epson-compatible dot-matrix, or
Hewlett-Packard Laserjet-compatible printer for both plots and
text.

Starting the software brings up a "Welcome" screen, and an
ENTER command brings the user into the HOME screen, with menu
options for YEAR, COUNTRY, OBSERVATORY, DATE-RANGE, AND
MODEOUTPUT. The "8" and "9" keys allow the user to scroll
through the choices, which are highlighted as the user moves
through them. Pressing the "ENTER" key selects the highlighted
option, and activates pop-up menus with further options. All
options may be selected using the 8, 9, and ENTER keys.
Selections may also be made with the use of "Hot Keys", which
are the first letter of each option, and indicated in the
software by use of a different color in the menu choices.
Pressing the particular Hot Key activates that menu choice
immediately. Hot Keys are indicated in this manual by the use
of bold type, for example, S(ave) means that if the "S" key is
pressed for the Save option, it is executed immediately. Once
all selections have been made, the EXECUTE option retrieves and
displays the chosen options. Pressing the "ALT" and "E" keys
simultaneously will exit the user back to DOS at any time, and
from anywhere within the program.

There are 6 MODE-OUTPUT options:

a. minute value plots,
#. minute values as text,
#. mean hourly value plots,
#. mean hourly values as text,
#. K-Index values as text,
#. a conversion option that converts data from the 32-bit binary
   format into the World Data Center (WDC) ASCII format.

The WDC format option was included to allow users with existing
software designed for this format to output the desired data
and import it into their existing programs.

Help screens are available throughout the program with the use
of the "F1" key. When the user is in a particular highlighted
menu item, the F1 key provides a help screen about that item.
In addition, information screens are available about a
particular country using the "F4" key, and about the particular
observatory using the "F3" key. These option keys appear on a
menu bar on the screen when the COUNTRY and/or OBSERVATORY
option is highlighted. The user can scroll through these README
screens using the "8" and "9" keys, once the F3 or F4 key has
been pressed.

Within the program, menu bars located at the top and bottom of
the screen, offer a variety of options. A map screen of each
country is available, showing the observatories contributing to
the CD-ROM from that country, by using the V(iew map) key once
the particular country has been chosen. Also, an A(bout) screen
is available for each country showing the organization's
address and the names of persons to contact regarding their
geomagnetism program. Users can change observatories (within a
given country) and date ranges while in the output mode without
having to return to the HOME screen. Individual components in
the plot outputs may be selected and displayed at an enlarged
scale using the C(omponent) option (Hot Key "C") from the menu
bar. While in the Component mode, the T(oggle) key toggles on
and off a histogram of hourly means and K-Index values (when
available) for the minute plots, and the Ak values for the mean
hourly values plots. P(rint) and S(ave) options are also
available for both graphics and text modes. Starting with the
1992 CD-ROM, a Base(l)ine option was made available that
provides absolutes and baseline calibration data for each
station. These data can be viewed either in the form of a plot
for each component, or in text mode showing the observed and
adopted values for the year. The plots also show a delta-F plot
of the differences between the observed and computed total
field (F) for some stations; and the text mode contains a
comments section pertaining to baseline jumps and other
observatory adjustments.

Other options that are available from the menu bars include a
B(eginning day) choice that resets the output to the beginning
of the selected date-range, a F2(Flow) chart of the software
program that indicates where the user is within the program and
what outputs are available, and a R(escale) option that allows
the user to set the scale of the plots. This feature disables
the autoscaling of the plots, and enables a user to plot data
at a fixed scale for comparison of different days and/or
observatories on the same full-range scale. However, if the
data cannot fit within the plot range, the Rescale option will
override the user-selected scale and autoscale to fit the data.
While in the HOME screen, the P(references) option allows the
user to customize certain parameters including the text and
background colors, the type of printer being used, and the
CD-ROM and output drive letter designations, it is also
possible to add CRLF (carriage return / linefeed characters) to
the records in any data converted to WDC-files.
